---
layout: post
title:  "Quick Thoughts on the Value of Junior Engineers"
date:   2020-02-20
landing-image: "/assets/images/posts/thinkpad-x1-slow-tackpoint.png"
comments: true
---

[![]({{ page.landing-image }}){: .bordered.landing-image.centered }]({{ page.landing-image }})

This year will be my eleventh year working as a professional software engineer.
Time flies! I've worked with many engineers, all with varying levels of
experience ranging from fresh college graduates to seasoned veterans. Early in
my career, I made it a goal to surround myself with engineers who were
[_"better"_]() than me. And by _better_, I mean _more experienced_. I find it's
one of the best ways to grow as a software engineer.

However, as I embark on my second decade of working in the software industry,
I'm finding myself more in the "senior" role rather than the "junior" role. And
with this shift in position, I'm realizing **there's a lot to gain from
surrounding yourself with _less_ experienced "junior" engineers**.

Here are some of the reasons I've come to value working with junior engineers!

## They encourage teams to improve (or create) an onboarding process

Onboarding is the process of getting a new employee ramped up and ready to work
as soon as possible. For software engineers, this includes setting up the local
development environment or installing an IDE. The main goal is to get the
engineer set up to do his or her job.

The lack of proper onboarding becomes very apparent when a junior engineer joins
the team. A bit more guidance is generally required in the case of someone who
hasn't worked with any of the standard tools or processes in the industry.

For example, if step-by-step Wiki docs aren't detailed enough, a new engineer
might struggle to follow them. On the other hand, if the docs are entire walls
of text, it may make the engineer feel like he or she is drinking from a
firehose!

If the technology stack is complex enough, it might be beneficial to use local
build automation tools like Docker or Vagrant to speed up the process. Sure, 
this type of automation hides some of the finer details about the development
environment from a junior engineer, but it will reduce the amount of time to
get it up and running.

Regardless of the team's approach to onboarding, the fresh eyes of a junior
engineer are very useful in improving the overall process!

## They force senior engineers to revisit software engineering fundamentals

After some time working in the tech industry, a developer learns some basic
fundamentals about software engineering. Basic programming paradigms, usually in
the form of acroynms (MVC, REST, SOLID, etc.), are typically learned on the job.
Engineering practices like sprints, retros, and standups are also most commonly
learned in an industry setting rather than an academic one.

Junior engineers coming in with no prior experience with these industry basics
are expected to learn them from senior members of the team. It's essential for
senior engineers to be able to answer the _why_ in addition to the _what_. For
example, it's not enough to explain _what_ composition over inheritence means,
but _why_ it's something that's preferred.

If senior engineers find themselves stumped by _why_ questions, it might be a
good time to revisit and relearn some of these key fundamentals. It isn't
required to be an expert on any particular topic, but it should be expected to
have enough knowledge to _teach_ key concepts. Not only does this help pass on
information to junior engineers, it reinforces and fortifies this knowledge
within senior engineers as well.

The ability to communicate and teach ideas is an important part of being a
senior engineer. Having junior engineers on a team allows them to exercise their 
mentorship skills while staying fresh in key concepts themselves.

## They re-ignite the excitement to grow and learn

After working in the tech industry for an extended period of time, the aches and
pains start to have wear and tear. Every sprint, you're sifting through the same
old codebase, deploying to the same old stack, etc.

When a junior engineer joins the team, they look at the same codebase and same
tech stack, but with bright eyes and an eager willingness to learn. Watching
someone grow and learn with such enthusiasm is inspiring and contagious. 


